Mohmand Agency suffers the same economic and governance problems as other regions in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. Only 27 percent of Mohmand residents have access to clean drinking water,[i] primary school enrollment in the district is 21.8 percent, and the net secondary school enrollment for males is an alarming 3.5 percent, while for females it is zero.[ii] Further, FATA parliamentarians do not believe that Pakistan has a plan for turning things around in Mohmand or in the FATA as a whole. In 2010, Pakistan allocated only 11 billion rupees ($140 million) for development in the FATA, which has an estimated population of 4 million people. This lack of assistance is a critical issue because Mohmand residents generally believe that the federal government is the only force that is capable of alleviating their poverty.[iii]

Mohmand’s residents are highly religious and conservative, but the agency nevertheless is considered to be more integrated into mainstream Pakistani society and culture than most other areas in the FATA and the NWFP.[iv] Mohmand is predominantly populated by nonviolent Deobandis, a Sunni belief tradition that advocates a conservative understanding and practice of Islam. However, since the 1970s when large numbers of Mohmand residents went to work in Gulf and Arab countries, the number of people in the agency who subscribe to the Salafi ideology has increased rapidly. Many Mohmand residents now support the implementation of sharia, although they lack consensus on what sharia specifically would mean in their society.[v] Young people in Mohmand live in a society with a very strict moral code that nonetheless features a variety of behavior considered “deviant.” The dichotomy seems to have brought many of Mohmand’s young men, “under the sway of new, foreign Islamic ideologies like Salafism, the ideology of al-Qaeda.”[vi] This is happening even though the people of Mohmand traditionally have preferred Tableeghi Jamaat, a conservative but nonviolentIslamic missionary movement, to militant groups.

### Structure of the Insurgency

Like other tribal areas of Pakistan, Mohmand was affected by the 1980s Soviet-Afghan war, when hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees burdened its fragile economy and social structure. However, unlike some other tribal areas, few militant recruiting and training camps for Afghan mujahideen and other international jihadists were established in the agency. After the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan in 1989, indigenous militant groups such as the Tehrik-i-Nifaz-i-Shariat-i-Muhammadi (TNSM) were established in the northern FATA and the neighboring Malakand Division of the North-West Frontier Province. Although these movements certainly affected Mohmand, they had relatively little organized infrastructure within its borders.